[00:00:03.930] - Speaker 1
Okay. Perfect. Hi there. Welcome to our interview with Ranjiv Bhair. I'm Tanmayi Nandan and I have with me my classmates, Varoon Bashyakarla and Samuel Berston.

[00:00:17.210] - Speaker 2
Hello.

[00:00:18.850] - Speaker 1
We are students at University of California, Berkeley, and we are pursuing a master's degree in information and cyber security. The three of us are taking a cryptography class taught by Professor Nahid Farhady Ghalaty. And the three of us decided to team up for a project on DNA cryptography as a part of our course's final project requirements. And as part of this effort, we decided to interview an expert to better understand how DNA cryptography works. So we have with us Professor Chiranjeev Bhaiya, who is an expert in the field. He holds a BTEC degree in Computer Science and Engineering and a M Tech degree in Computer Science Engineering with specialization in Information Security from IIT Dhanbad. He's currently working as a lead engineer at the Samsung R D Institute, and his research interest focuses on applications of DNA computing in various fields such as DNA and image cryptography and machine learning. Hi Chiranjeev, thanks so much for joining us.

[00:01:23.690] - Speaker 2
Hi. Hello everyone. Thank you for the opportunity. Good to meet you all. Thanks.

[00:01:29.680] - Speaker 1
Thank you. So our discussion and interview today is going to be focused on DNA cryptography, like I just said, and this is the branch of cryptography where nitrogenous basis of a DNA molecule is used in the encryption decryption algorithms for crypto systems to enhance security. And it's currently an exciting area of research. Chiranjeev Bhaya, with his team of Professor Aruk Kumar Pal and FK Hafizul Islam, have published several DNA cryptography related papers and are subject matter experts in the field. We specifically want to talk about their published chapter titled a novel Image Encryption and Decryption scheme using DNA Computing. In the latest installment of the book series, advances in Computers on Perspective of DNA Computing and Computer Science, published by LCV in 2023. Chiranjeev and his colleagues have proposed the use of DNA computing in image based crypto systems, and they've used a lot of novel technologies like chaotic maps for pseudorandum sequence generation and unique encoding and decoding schemes for DNA. All of us thoroughly enjoyed reading the publication and found it very informative and clear. And through this interview, we hope to get a better understanding of how DNA computing enhances the security of crypto systems and also go over some conceptual and implementational details of the proposed crypto system in the mentioned paper.

[00:03:14.430] - Speaker 1
And I'm confident that we learn a great deal from this discussion, which would be very useful for us in our research and understanding of DNA cryptography. And with that, I'll hand it over to my classmate Varun to get us started.

[00:03:31.090] - Speaker 3
Thanks Dhanmai, and thank you so much for joining us today. When we read your publication, we thought, wouldn't it be nice if we had a chance to speak to you directly? And here we are. So I'm really happy that you're able to join us before jumping into the publication itself, we were all curious to learn how you got interested in DNA cryptography and what prompted you to start conducting area in this field so I.

[00:04:00.930] - Speaker 2
Was pursuing my master's with specialization in information security. So in our masters, the second year of the masters is completely dedicated to research so initially my professor was working in the field of applications of DNA computing so my first work was on DNA data storage. So in that the concept is how we can use DNA molecules to store data. And from there we found that there are many works on DNA computing and DNA cryptography also. And since the specialization was more focused on security and we had studied conventional image crypto systems, conventional text crypto systems, so we saw something exciting going on. That how they're trying to use DNA molecules, which is going to be something advanced apart from what we use silicon bits for crypto systems. So this work when we traced back, we found that Adelman started the work of DNA computing so in which he thought of solving some complex computational problems using the properties of DNA molecules. So the first work which he did was probably solving three sat problem or traveling salesman problem in a very small scale using practically in wet labs so from there these things went ahead.

[00:05:38.220] - Speaker 2
Then DNA was used as an application of data storage because it was claimed that if we can store data in the form of DNA instead of silicon chips so terabytes of data can be stored in a very small molecule because we know that the entire sequence of a human being or any living organism so the entire biological sequence, the biological characteristics so much of data is stored in such macromolecules. So these can be used as a means to store data for us also like images, videos or texts and all. Then it was found that DNA has high parallelism capacity. So you can run parallel computing in a very efficient way. So because of these properties, DNA was thought to be an efficient means of solving computational problems and cryptography is one of them. So the work which we did is basically a theoretical study on DNA properties and how we use these theoretical properties to achieve our computational goals. So on some labs, in some wet labs and all they are trying to synthesize, sequence and practically produce these DNA molecules and see what is the effect of storage, how it can be done now when the part of storage comes.

[00:07:03.960] - Speaker 2
So there is a need for security as well because if these comes to real life implementations say in the next 20 or 30 years we see all computers using DNA molecules as a means of storage instead of the silicon chips that we have now there will be a need for security as well. So when security comes, security in the form of say, text data or multimedia data like images and videos. So a lot of work has been going on for enhancing the security of these DNA data and especially when they are in the form of images or videos or any multimedia. So this is how we found that lot of interesting work is going on. And then we tried to study a number of papers, number of works which are going on. And we tried to see what improvements can be done, what we can propose, what new things the novel implementations can be done. How we can come up with enhancing the algorithms with the knowledge of conventional computing as well as the new DNA computing that is going on. So this is how we started our journey in this area.

[00:08:18.830] - Speaker 3
Thanks so much. It's really nice to hear this because I think we're quite new to this topic, certainly in comparison to you, who's been doing research on this field for years now. But we went through a similar kind of trajectory of reading about how DNA can be used for data storage, also reading about Edelman's using DNA to solve the Hamiltonian Path problem, which was an empty, complete problem. And then thinking about how a world in which information will be physically synthesized into DNA in the future, perhaps is also a world in which information needs to be secured via DNA. And there are these really convenient properties, as you mentioned, how dense DNA is, its capacity for high parallelism. That makes it a really suitable medium for this kind of work. And it's a good segue into another question we had in starting this journey down trying to understand DNA cryptography. We have reviewed, probably now about a dozen or so papers in which the four bases at C and G are used to digitally encode and to decode information. And I just want to read a short quote from your publication that we all read in your paper on DNA based image cryptography.

[00:09:46.890] - Speaker 3
You write DNA encoding and decoding add a nonlinear layer and the DNA based XOR is not straightforward as bitwise XOR. The use of DNA therefore ensures.

[00:10:00.330] - Speaker 1
Better confusion and diffusion than conventional encryption algorithms and therefore increases the overall efficiency of the crypto system. Can you elaborate for us, Shrenji, on what security benefits DNA encoding affords, especially when we remain in the digital realm and when this information is not being synthesized into DNA strands, that then can leverage these convenient properties of DNA, like dense storage and high parallelism. I guess maybe what I'm trying to ask is why not simply leave these steps in binary or encode the underlying data into different alphabets?

[00:10:42.030] - Speaker 2
Okay, it's a good question. So basically what happens is if you try to take two bits of binary and try to encode into, say, a DNA sequence, right, ACTG. So there are many combinations possible, right? So there will be 24 combinations possible. Whether you put all that four bits can be encoded into binary. But in the concept of DNA, there is a concept of Watson Crick complementary rules. So in those rules, Watson and Crick, they found in DNA that A and T should be complement of each other, and GRC are complement of each other, right? So in binary, if we see zero, zero and eleven, they are complement of each other. Bitwise complement, and zero, one and 10 are complement of each other. So if we follow these rules, you can find in my paper itself. I have shown in table five and table six. So we can have eight valid rules by how we can convert these binary values into DNA during encoding and also eight corresponding rules. How we can convert these nucleotides back to binary form in table six, as shown by following these complementary rules. Now, what happens is when you can map these things, like you can map to eight different values, right?

[00:12:13.500] - Speaker 2
Zero, one you can map to eight different values. Similarly, while decoding, you can map each of these nucleotides to eight different values, right? So for a single, say, two bits of data, which we have in the original data, it can be mapped to eight different values. So it is a process of substitution, which we have in general cryptography, like you substitute some bits to some other bits, and we have eight different values. So it is like one too many substitutions, and it gives you more options for substituting in these parts. Similarly, when we have XOR based on which rule we are using, there can be eight different HR operations between two nucleotides. Now, in DNA cryptography, how we decide which rule is to be used. So we take some pseudo random values, especially we use chaotic maps. So in those chaotic maps, we can randomly generate numbers from one to eight. And whatever numbers we are using, we pick one of those rules from there, right? So this adds a nonlinear layer. So the first two bits which you change into DNA, for example, you are performing encoding rules, right? So you're first converting an image into DNA molecules.

[00:13:27.930] - Speaker 2
So it's not straightforward that a pixel which represents value will be represented as a single value, say a always. So a pixel which is represented by may be represented by A or G or C or T, anything depending on which rule it was used to encode. And that rule was taken from the chaotic maps and that chaotic maps are generated from this key, the secured key. So this is how we get more options. And there are many options of mapping, like two bits into nucleotides. So this adds enhanced layer. So we have eight options for encoding, eight options for decoding and eight options for any operation which we perform. So whether we are performing XR or we are performing addition, subtraction, any operation which we are performing. So we are having so many options, so it makes things more secure, right? Because all these which options are being used, they are all dependent on the key value which is used for encryption and decryption. So this is one way how it enhances non conventional computing.

[00:14:42.970] - Speaker 1
That's really helpful. Thank you so much. And I just also looked up when you were speaking table five and six with the explicit with all eight options for the encoding and decoding rules. And this makes a lot of sense, as you say, I'm thinking about it this way, it's not even entropy preserving, it's kind of entropy enhancing. As you mentioned, we go from a one to many mapping and one of the other not in the context of image based encryption or security. But we read also for example, in the context of text based DNA encoding and security that one of the benefits of this particular alphabet using the four bases as opposed to other alphabets is that you also disrupt a kind of frequency analysis that could be done through crypt analysis. Of course, like I said, more in the context of text based encoding. Yeah, very helpful, very interesting. And just to pick up on what you were ending this remark with about the key, because of the amount of data and data redundancy contained in the images, as you mentioned in the paper, these images are customarily encrypted using symmetric key cryptography in which the key exchange can be a challenge.

[00:16:12.230] - Speaker 1
Cryptographic systems need to be long and as you also write, they need to be from a key space that achieves a balance of security and performance. Your proposed algorithm employs a symmetric key of 192 bits which is resistant to brute force attacks but also quite long. How could secure key sharing work in the context of this algorithm?

[00:16:38.190] - Speaker 2
The secure key sharing is similar to any secure key sharing algorithm which is used in image encryptions. So two reasons why symmetric key is used, because if we use asymmetric key, so we know there are protocols for asymmetric key exchange which are mostly used for text data. Now, text data does not have so much volume in size, right? It may be a few bytes or a few kilobytes or megabytes. But we know images are huge in size. For example, 512 cross 512 we made, the size will be like 512 cross 512. Now, if it is a color image with eight bits each pixel of each channel, you multiply that by 24. So a raw image will be huge in size. So using asymmetric key is not possible, because to encrypt an image or any data of such huge size, you need to expand the key to such a value, such a big value. Right? So asymmetric keys are costlier in operation because a number of steps are involved, both the parties, the sender and the receiver have to perform a lot of computations to finally encode and decode whatever is there. So in any multimedia data, whether it is images or multi, audio, video, anything which is enormous insights, we use symmetric key.

[00:18:01.900] - Speaker 2
Now, for symmetric key exchange, there are some well known key exchange protocols like DeFi Hellman Key exchange protocol, which is widely used. So any of those secured protocols can be used for exchanging of keys. So here in this work, I have used 192 bits of key. So some works may use 256 bits of key. So anything which is above 128 bits is difficult to be cracked using brute force attack, right? So anything which is above 128 bits is secured like it is resistant to brute force attack. And exchange of the keys can be done by using any of the key exchange protocols. So this work was not focused on how we design the key exchange protocols. And all this work is mostly focused only on how we design the encoding and decoding algorithm for image crypto systems.

[00:19:02.830] - Speaker 1
Understood?

[00:19:03.590] - Speaker 2
Yes.

[00:19:03.870] - Speaker 1
And we saw that it's more on exactly the encoding decoding schemes, the encryption decryption steps, than on the development of a full crypto system. But as you say, they're pieces of what's required to be a full crypto system that are taken care of by existing solutions. For example yes, the diffie hellman key exchange. Thank you so much. Very informative. I'm learning a lot already. With that, I will hand it over to Thunmai to ask some conceptual questions that we had perfect.

[00:19:38.010] - Speaker 3
So I think even in the introduction I mentioned that one of the novel techniques, at least I noticed, was the use of chaotic maps, which was not ordinarily used in the other papers we reviewed and looked at. So how do you think the use of chaotic maps is different from, say, using a simple pseudorandum number generator PRNG system? And how important is it to select a good chaotic function? Because I saw in your paper that you used a specific function for generating the chaotic maps. So how are these different from the simpler ones we've seen in the past? And if you could talk about the importance of the function itself yeah, so.

[00:20:30.970] - Speaker 2
What happens is, in image crypto systems, the image is composed of like the image is huge in size, right? It is more than what we have in say, a text data. Now, if you try to use any pseudorandum sequence, so even chaotic maps are pseudorandum sequence. So if you try to use any pseudorandum generator, the first question comes is can you generate so many number of pseudorandum sequences by the initial seed value? So if you select a pseudorandom generator, is it possible to generate? Now, it depends. If there are pseudorandum generators which can generate, they can be used as well. But in image crypto systems, it has been found that chaotic maps, they can generate large number of pseudorandum sequence. Now, if you see any encryption process, even in my paper in this chapter, I have described the encryption process. So what happens is if you see figure six of the chapter, so we have a plane image and there are a number of steps for confusion and diffusion, right? So in confusion, what we do is we just move the scatter the pixels here and there and in diffusion, what we do is we change the values of the pixels depending on some key values.

[00:21:50.680] - Speaker 2
Now, each of these steps, whatever are being used in any encryption function for images, these will require a large number of pseudorandum sequences. Moreover, images are multidimensional, right? So if we are working on a 2D image, we have two dimension. If we work in a 3D image, we have three dimension. So multiply the dimension in that way. So we have so many images, so many pixels to be altered, so many bits to be flipped or in terms of DNA, so many nucleotides to be confused and diffused. So for each of this operation we will need somehow we need to generate pseudorandum sequences. And chaotic maps are very good option for this way because if you study chaotic maps in details so what happens is the function at some point becomes like chaotic. You cannot predict what will be the next value based on knowing the previous value and these sequences, you can generate similar sequence in a large number of streams. So these large number of sequences will be useful in our image encryption. That is why chaotic map service, this is number one reason. Second reason is in terms of security, what happens is there is a principle that if you change slightly your encryption key, say if you are changing one bit of your encryption key, the resultant cipher image or ciphertext or the cipher data, whatever is coming, that should change a lot.

[00:23:24.770] - Speaker 2
Otherwise there are possibilities of plain text attacks, ciphertext attacks, different types of attacks are possible. Now, these chaotic maps are very sensitive to the initial data. So the initial data initial like the sequence which we have, the initial parameters which are used in the chaotic maps, if you change them very slightly. So the entire behavior of the chaotic map or the numbers they generate will change a lot. So this is another reason why chaotic maps are used for image encryption. Now, the choice of chaotic map so if you go through some papers who explicitly have worked on designing chaotic maps, so they have a number of parameters to check whether their chaotic map is really generating pseudo random values or not. So our work was not focused on generating or designing chaotic map. We have just implemented, we have just taken a chaotic function which has been proposed by someone else in some other work and they have been used in image crypto systems. Now, what happens is chaotic maps are used in a number of steps, as I discussed earlier. For example, when we generate the encoding rules, when we generate the decoding rules, when we use the XOR operations, right?

[00:24:47.340] - Speaker 2
So we have different eight possibilities. Now, which one, which option to choose the value will get from the chaotic map which we are using right now. If we choose a chaotic map in such a way that can generate random values and we see that when the entire process is done, for example, a DNA encoding process is done, the number of times rule number one has been chosen. The number of times rule number two has been chosen, rule number three has been chosen. Each of these rule have been chosen very randomly and almost equal number of times. So it is very difficult to guess or very difficult to attack that crypto system. That particular chaotic map is better. So generally we can experiment it out, we can go through how those chaotic maps are designed. So our work was not focused on designing of chaotic maps. But yes, it is very important to choose a chaotic map which is better in performance. In that way we'll attain two success. One is we may get faster encryption, the number of steps to secure an image may reduce drastically if we have very good chaotic map. And secondly, on security aspect, it may be a stronger encryption and decryption algorithm if the chaotic maps are proper.

[00:26:09.350] - Speaker 2
So nowadays people are coming up with multidimensional. So one dimension is like a basic, then two dimension, three dimension, four dimension, five dimension multidimensional. Chaotic maps are coming up for this purpose.

[00:26:23.050] - Speaker 3
Yeah, perfect. So we were looking at the paper you referenced as well for the chaotic map you used. That was also very informative. But one sort of clarification question I had was I know you just mentioned that you use the chaotic maps to sort of decide which encoding rule to use among the eight rules or for the different operations. So my question was do the chaotic maps only generate that one to eight sort of numbers to choose the rules from? Or is it also used in the encryption logic as, I don't know, a key or something like that?

[00:27:08.890] - Speaker 2
Yes, they are used for both the purposes. Now, what happens is if you see figure eight of my paper, this particular book chapter. So you can see there is something like first is pixel permutation, right? So what we do is we permutate the pixels. Something like AIG will be going to a of I dash J dash. Now, where these pixels will be permuted, this is a confusion process, right? Where this will go, this is generated by the chaotic map. Then encoding rules, that is also decided by the chaotic map. Now, for example, we want to perform some diffusion operation like a DNA XOR, right? So DNA XOR, what happens is we have the image matrix in some part and then we will XOR it or we'll apply any binary operation on this. Okay? So in this process, what happens? We need a matrix of similar size as that of an image. So we'll perform that operation with that. So now how we'll get that feudorandom matrix, so that is also generated by the chaotic map. So, if you see my other work so this was simply a book chapter. If you see any of my other works so if possible, I'll try to share my screen.

[00:28:37.510] - Speaker 2
Can you enable sharing screen? I'll try to present let me try.

[00:28:43.370] - Speaker 4
To do that right now. And if we're not able to do it, I will splice it into the recording of this video.

[00:29:00.960] - Speaker 2
Can any of you share the screen? Share your screen?

[00:29:05.200] - Speaker 4
Yes, I can share my screen.

[00:29:07.520] - Speaker 2
So if you can go to my Google Scholar page and share now, you.

[00:29:12.990] - Speaker 4
Should be able to do it.

[00:29:15.060] - Speaker 2
Okay. Yeah, profit. So, yeah, I hope my screen is visible. So this is one of the work which I did. So here, this is also an image encryption image crypto system. And in this work, what we did is we took a chaotic map and our contribution was mostly in designing of a novel operator, right? So in general crypto systems, what we do is we use XR operator or say addition subtraction operator. But that operator has some limitations. So to overcome those limitations, we designed a new operator which can perform better. Now, if you see the encryption flowchart which I am presenting right now. So if we use a chaotic map so here I use infinite collapse map, okay? So this part has a number of steps. Now, for each steps the chaotic map is used. For example, there is a step for mixing of rows, right? So for that, how do we get this mixing of rows needs some initial vector. How we'll get those initial vector from the values of the chaotic map. Then we get rules right? Out of those eight encoding rules which rule to be used during encryption. So again, that is also used from the chaotic map, right?

[00:31:01.850] - Speaker 2
So we get different rules for say, DNA encoding out of eight rules. Then again, there is something called DNA substitution, right? We substitute one value with another. Now that also need eight rules, which rule has to be used for substitution. Now, that also is done by the chaotic map. Now, the rule for substitution we have got, but we need a substitution map also. So the map has to be map is nothing but a matrix which is of the same size of the image that we are trying to encrypt. So even to get that value, so say we are encrypting a natural image, eight bit image. So every pixel has a size of eight bits. So if the dimension of the image is m cross n, the size of the matrix will be m cross n into eight number of bits. So we need those many values for substitution, even that matrix substitution matrix of size n cross m, and each element of that matrix having eight bits. Even that map is also formulated from the chaotic map. So this is the advantage of using chaotic map over other pseudorandom sequences that we can generate large number of random data based on our need.

[00:32:21.780] - Speaker 2
Now, if you want to encrypt a medical image which is of 16 bit length, so every pixel is of 16 bit, you can use the same chaotic map and extend it to 16 bits. The substitution map will be extended to 16 bits and then whatever operation you want to use. For example, in this work, we have used our proposed operator here. So in other in conventional DNA based or natural cryptosystems, you will find mostly XOR is used. So the same thing is being used here. So how you will exhaust with what values you will exalt. So that map is also formed by the chaotic maps.

[00:33:06.260] - Speaker 3
Okay, perfect. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. We were wondering if it's only used at one place or two, but looks like it's used throughout to sort of randomize and enhance security throughout the algorithm. And that was very useful. Thank you. And before we move to the next question, sam, I see a timer that says we have about two minutes left. So do you want to just send over a new link?

[00:33:35.680] - Speaker 4
Yeah, thanks for pointing that out. I'll pause the recording right now and the meeting will end, and then I will put a new link in the email thread. All.

