
[00:00:23.470] - Speaker 2
 So, moving on to the next question, we had chiranjeev, your paper covers three types of images in the literature review. The natural images, the Med images, and then the color images. So we wanted to know how the proposed DNA encryption system evaluates against each of these image types and are there any patterns in the way the three image types benefit from the proposed crypto system.

[00:00:55.770] - Speaker 4
Okay, so basically, this was a book chapter which was meant to cover all aspects of crypto systems which are used. So images are of three types, right? Medical images and color images and grayscale images. Now, a color image is nothing but a three channel grayscale image, right? So if you take an RGB color image, it will have three channels, one for the red color, red, green and blue channels. And some color images may also be in some other formats, like YUV and so on. Nonetheless, they can be converted into RGB or anything. So my work was mostly focused this particular work was mostly focused on grayscale eight bit image. But if anyone tries to encrypt color images also, they can easily do it using the same concept. The only thing that will change is the size of your DNA maps, your chaotic maps. Everything will increase three times in case it is a color image which you are trying to encrypt. If you are trying to encrypt medical image. Right? Now, medical image comes in different formats. So DICOM is one of the famous format in which medical images are stored. And because those images are very sensitive, so each pixel is encoded into more number of bits to have more data.

[00:02:21.500] - Speaker 4
So there are like 16 bit encoded medical images where every pixel has 16 bit of data. So again, if you want to encrypt a medical image using the same crypto system so instead of generating, say, when you are trying to encode one pixel into DNA part. So if you take two bits at a time if it is an eight bit natural image, so they will map to four DNA nucleotides. If it is a 16 bit medical image, they will map to eight nucleotides. So accordingly, whether you are trying to encrypt a natural image or a medical image or a color image, so the size of all the vectors that you are using, all the mattresses that you are using for encoding, the chaotic maps you are using, they will increase or decrease accordingly. So that's how we can use these crypto systems to, say, encrypt different types of images. But I have particularly worked on eight bit natural images to demonstrate all the experiments and results of this.

[00:03:32.590] - Speaker 2
Okay, got it. But we could easily extend the same algorithm for the rest of the images as well and slightly modify those sort of image maps and the keys used. Perfect. That answers a lot of our questions. And with that, I'll pass it over to Sam for the next set of questions.

[00:03:54.290] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Thanks so much, Tanmay. So my question is related to performing operations on images in image form versus encoded as bytecode. And in response to Varun's question on symmetric key encryption, you already mentioned that image data differs from text data in that images contain a greater volume of data as well as greater redundancy. And this mandates a different set of algorithms that are more computationally efficient on images than would be on text. Also, in response to Varun's question on encoding the DNA bases into bytecode, you described the different tables and the eight sets of rules for encoding DNA sequences into bytecodes. I'm wondering, since the image is going to be encoded into bytecode in order before it's encoded into the DNA bases cryptography on the image encoded as bytecode in the first place, and could that possibly add security? It seems that it would be more computationally expensive, but would that matter in this context? And is it something that's often done or is it not done as often to perform cryptography on the image encoded in bytecode?

[00:05:22.910] - Speaker 4
Okay, so basically why we need so many steps for image encryption, why is it not straightforward as a text encryption, right? So what happens is in images, the adjacent pixels are very related to correlated to each other. For example, if I am seeing an image of your face, right, or my face, any face is there. And if I try to encrypt the way texts are encrypted, so what may happen is the cipher image which we get, that will alter the pixel values, no doubt. But whatever resultant cipher image you'll get, that will not be noisy. So it will have some patterns from which you can easily identify that it is the image of a human being, right? So those redundancies are not lost if it is done the way text image is done. So if you see the result section of any image in crypto system, even one of my book chapter, also if you see the results, the final cipher image is very chaotic, right? You can see figure eleven. So I have tried to encrypt figure eleven, point A, that is a Lena image. And when I encrypt it using the steps which we followed, so it is very noisy.

[00:06:45.220] - Speaker 4
You can't even identify whether it is the image of a human face or is it some scenery or is it anything, right? So if you try to encrypt it the way texts are done using bytecodes and all those things so what may happen is the face like here, which we have tried to encode, it may get distorted, but the resultant cipher image what we'll get that can still identify by seeing that we can still identify that it is the case of a human being. So it defeats the purpose of encryption. And if you see the analysis here, if you see figure eleven C. So it shows that how in images, the adjacent pixels are correlated, right? This correlation should not exist in the cipher image. So in figure eleven F, you see the correlation matrix for the cipher image, there is no correlation. So this is very important in case of images, in case of text, why it is straightforward is because there is hardly correlation between adjacent letters, right? So, for example, if you see the text Berkeley B-E-R-K-E-L-E-Y. Right? It doesn't matter whether E comes after B or what comes, different texts will be in different formats.

[00:08:07.720] - Speaker 4
But in images, what happens is adjacent pixels are very correlated. For example, if you just look at the part where a human face is there, right? So the adjacent pixels will be very correlated, and the patterns in which the intensities are increasing or decreasing. If we encrypt them in how texts are encrypted, then it will be difficult to remove that correlation. So one way we can do is if we transform the image in some way so that it is not an image anymore, right? So if we can do that, then we can encrypt it in that way. But that is like a different part that is not completely into image crypto systems. So I had another work on a similar thing like this. I'll share my screen if you enable. Got it. Okay. Still it is showing disabled public.

[00:09:23.290] - Speaker 3
Sorry, I shared your video feed, not your computer. Let me change that now.

[00:09:32.890] - Speaker 4
Okay. Yes. Okay. This is another work which was done. So this was published in IEEE conference on communications. So the basic idea for this work was images are huge in size, right? And using DNA compression, we can reduce the size of the images. So as a result, what happens is if I can represent a large image, and if I take a large image and I can compress it to a very small part, and then if I try to encrypt the compressed image, the computational cost will reduce automatically as compared to compressing the entire image. So this work I have taken basically on medical image, studying the correlations and redundancies in medical images. So here what I have done is you can see in this flow diagram, there are two parts. One is compression, and other is encryption. Now, for this compression, what I have done is I have taken an image and I have not kept it as a matrix after compression. So when the image is compressed, it will be just like a stream of ATGC sequences, a stream of DNA sequences. And for that, I have proposed an algorithm which is DNA based quadratic decomposition.

[00:11:09.270] - Speaker 4
So using this decomposition, I'll just get a DNA sequence, which will be just like a normal text. Now, this text can be compressed just like how normal text data is compressed. I have used DNA based ae. So AES is a well known compression algorithm which is used for text. So if we transform an image into a domain so that all this correlation, all redundancy is lost and this is represented as something else and not an image matrix, then we can use those techniques which are used for text to compress it here. So here if you see this proposed algorithm and this part, so here what I do is I divide the image into quad trees and then I represent the entire image in the form of a tree structure. And this tree structure can be represented in the form of a DNA representation. So this entire tree structure can be represented something like this. Now, unless you know the encoding process, so this does not look like an image at all, right? This is completely some text. So in this way, this is an example, this is a small matrix of zeros and ones if we consider it to be an image.

[00:12:32.540] - Speaker 4
So zero represents one pixel value. So it is basically like bitwise operations. We are decomposing the image into bit planes. And then this entire representation of this matrix, I'm converting it into a DNA representation. Now, this can be encoded into using text based encoding, this one, something like that. So, for example, if you see here, so this is an image matrix, something like this, with some pixel values. And using my compression algorithm, what I'm doing is I'm converting it into a DNA sequence which does not even contain, which is not even in the form of rows and columns or any matrix. So in this way, what will happen is it is just like text and it is converted into some other format. And then we can use I have taken initial vector and encryption key using that, I have used DNA based AES and this is the encrypted format. So this is the cipher, this is the DNA sequence, original DNA sequence. Now we can reverse this process to decipher it and then again decompress it to get the original image. So this is another way how you can look into image crypto systems and try to transform the image into some other domain and then encrypt it.

[00:13:50.400] - Speaker 4
And then it will work. But as long as it is in the form of an image and your cipher is also in the form of a matrix, you need to take care of those parameters that even visually, you should not be able to guess what the original image is just by looking at the cipher image.

[00:14:10.790] - Speaker 1
Thank you so much for this detailed response. A quick follow up question. Are medical images exemplary of this issue with image cryptography due to their high contrast and concentration of data?

[00:14:24.570] - Speaker 4
No, it is applicable for both natural images, color images and medical images as well. So this particular work which I am presenting you now, so for compression, I have sorry, go ahead. Okay. So this particular work which I am presenting so here. What I observed is our observation was if you take any medical image, right, you'll find that only in some region the information is concentrated and rest of the region it is like redundant. So the compression algorithm here will work better for such images because we are focusing to remove the redundancy where we don't have any useful information compared to the places where we have more useful information. So as a result of this, what happens is we can get better compression. Now, if you try to encode a natural image with this process, it may happen that the entire image is spread over, the important contents are spread over the entire frame, and the compression algorithm may not work as good as it works for medical images. So this particular work was particular to medical images and other things like cryptography aspects for images, whatever we are discussing. So that holds good for any type of images.

[00:15:57.670] - Speaker 1
Very nice. Thank you so much. Hiranjeev. So I will now pass it on to Varun to discuss where you see this work going in the future and things we can look forward to.

[00:16:08.890] - Speaker 3
Thanks, Sam. Yes, Sharanjeev. You mentioned in the paper that there are some in the book chapter that there are some improvements that could be extracted, for example, from developing faster algorithms or more efficient crypto systems, new DNA based operations, new DNA based chaotic maps as well. I'm just curious to hear, are you and your colleagues working on these potential advancements and maybe just share with us a little bit about what kind of efforts you're working on now in terms of future extensions of this work.

[00:16:48.570] - Speaker 4
Yeah, so there are many things, as you might have understood from the discussion. So starting from designing of chaotic maps, then designing of key exchange protocols for DNA and then implementing these things in Wetlab. So if we can really implement these things in Wetlab and see what the results are, how the constraints are behaving, so if we try to implement it biologically in WETLabs, we may find additional constraints coming up when these things happen. So there's lot of scope for this. So we were working on the theoretical aspects only, particularly on image crypto systems. Now, it can also be extended to other multimedia data. You can try to work on, say, video data encryption in DNA format. That would be even like a more challenging task. So other multimedia data, audio encryption in DNA format. So it is a very good research scope. So Dr. Aroop and Dr. Hafizul, they are still working on this. So I moved to Samsung after completing my master's, and now I'm working on a completely different domain. So this was my master's work. So these are future aspects. So there are many scopes. We can try to implement many things only in the field of cryptography.

[00:18:18.930] - Speaker 4
Also on data storage, also we can explore the use of DNA in, say, other computational aspects. We can think of using DNA in, say, machine learning, if we can. So one of my papers, if you see in Google scholars, so that had an application of using DNA for content based image retrieval, using machine learning techniques. So there we are imitating the behavior of DNA to perform tasks like image recognition and all which are done by machine learning. And we are trying to propose algorithms which will work on DNA based molecules instead of silicon based. And we'll try to see if they can enhance or we can create new machine learning algorithms on that. So there's a lot of scope in this field, maybe trying to solve computational problems which are therapy hard, going ahead with that, realizing and making proper algorithms and all. So there's a lot of scope in this. Dr. Aruk? Dr. Hafizul? They are still working on that. And there may be researchers in different parts of the world who are also working. So this is a very interesting, promising and challenging field of research that, you.

[00:19:45.940] - Speaker 3
Know, like I said at the beginning, we are quite new to it. And when we were thinking about what to focus our final project on and we happened upon this field, we thought it was so fascinating. And there's a line in the final sentence of the abstract says in this book chapter, in the end, this chapter throws some light on possible improvements, motivating the readers to add significant contributions to this exciting subject. And of course, I think the three of us are very interested in this. And, yeah, perhaps, I don't know, for students like know, we're master students at Berkeley. We're quite new to this field, but very enthusiastic. How would you recommend, as someone who has done extensive work in the field, how would you recommend kind of getting involved? Would you suggest reaching out to your other collaborators who are continuing this work? Yeah, just curious to hear your thoughts.

[00:20:47.190] - Speaker 4
Yes, you can obviously reach out to the other collaborators. And it is a new way of computation that is coming up, right? For example, 30 years ago, no one thought that computers would be so developed as they are today. We would have silicon chips and say, you can store now one TB of data in a small SD card, right? So, so much of compression has been done. Now, just imagine 2030 years from now, if you can store, say, 1000 TBS of data in a smaller, like, say, in 1 gram of DNA, if you can store so those things will come up, parallelism, will be more, computation will be even faster, the networks will evolve. Right now we have five G, six G networks coming up. They are so fast. So, say 1020 years ago, no one imagined that something like this would come up. So it is advanced field. It is a promising field, which we'll see in coming course of time. And, yeah, as students, you can think of how we can evolve this subject, anything which is being done in computer science, how we can make it practical in terms of DNA. Now, a challenge here is like I have seen, there are some institutes where in the field of biotechnology, they are trying to experiment these things out in wet labs.

[00:22:20.630] - Speaker 4
So it is a collaborative subject with biotechnology, computer science, mathematics and all engineering. So collaboration with these things to finally come up with some design, some products which actually use this from end to end. Like, you are storing data in DNA, you are transferring data in DNA and you are using this just like how you use a normal computer today. So this is the future. So you can always get to our collaborators, study more on this, try to find out new ideas, new implementations, what can be done.

[00:22:55.870] - Speaker 3
Absolutely. I have to say, I find the possibility of this whole end to end system very exciting. And it seems like from the research that we have done, one of the big bottlenecks right now is the fact that and correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems like today the process of actually synthesizing these DNA strands is quite cost prohibitive. It's just too expensive still today. And obviously, for a system like this to be functional, the process of storing and then retrieving data would ideally work without too much latency. And it seems like the process there are existing solutions on the market now where you can store some data in DNA and then retrieve it. But of course, with much higher latency than what we would need for a system like this to be functional. But, yeah, the possibility of the methods improving to actually make the process of synthesizing these DNA strands and of course, storing them in a secured way.

[00:24:04.070] - Speaker 4
It.

[00:24:05.050] - Speaker 3
Almost feels like another world entirely. It's kind of unimaginable compared to the status quo that we're operating in today. But I have to say, it is very exciting to think about.

[00:24:17.930] - Speaker 4
Yes. Cool.

[00:24:20.080] - Speaker 3
Well, with that, Shiranjeev, we will wrap this up and let you get on with your day. Thank you so much for your time. I have to say, I've really learned a lot and I also feel eager now to read more of your work on the topic. It sounds like you've done. We knew this already, but even more work than we had realized in this domain and have contributed a lot to the field. And yeah, we're eager to explore more of it. So with that, I'll say thank you. Thank you so much for your time and sharing your college with us. And we'll, of course, be in touch.

[00:24:57.430] - Speaker 4
Thank you very much. Thank you very much for inviting me. It was a wonderful time with you guys.

[00:25:02.890] - Speaker 3
Thank you for us as well. Thank you. Bye.

